---
published: true
title: Paranoia
layout: post
tags: [paranoia]
---
Trying to describe paranoia to someone who hasn't felt it is like trying to describe the color red to someone who hasn't seen it, but I'm going to try and describe what it's like for me.

There a constant baseline of uneasiness that can sound a lot like anxiety, but is rooted in something different.  There's a constant distrust of your environment, people, their intentions, and what may happen.  I am extremely uncomfortable with my back to the door, because something might happen (and my mind tells me it's possible) that I won't be able to see and react to.  I'm equally uncomfortable standing in front of someone, preferring to turn slightly so my back isn't towards them.  It's a fear that something undesirable is going to happen and be made worse by being unable to see it occur.

It's a constant nag at the back of the mind that there's something unseen or unknown that will adversely affect me.  While it's possible to rationalize about the paranoid feelings, that doesn't change the discomfort, it can only guide the reaction to it.

At baseline levels, the paranoia is manageable, even to a point where others won't notice it.  But there are episodes in which the paranoia goes off the charts.  It starts with a feeling almost like a burning in my veins.  Something had happened, or is happening, and I've missed it.  What that thing is ambiguous, but in my mind, I know it is there, I know the effects are impending and the final result will be disastrous for me.

My mind races, flailing madly to put the pieces together.  Memories from days to years ago get put together, trying to pick out patterns, some sort of hint as to what is going on.  Sometimes, it's inconsistencies in what someone has said, obviously indicating that they've always been lying to me and are actually working for "them".  Other times, it latches onto things I've done, a mistake, or something I was possibly misleading about, or I wasn't sufficiently anonymous.  It's then the police (or "them") coming for me.

My rational mind doesn't work for the acute instances.  To me, my rational mind is what informed me.  It's still possible to rationalise about it, just absurdly difficult.  It's literally identifying and questioning who, why, what, when and how.  If any of them are unknown/unknowable, I know that it's likely an irrational feeling.  Frequently, the who is the biggest part...if I cannot identify specific individuals or organizations (and keep the rational understanding that all government organizations are known, even if they have clandestine operations), then I know that the paranoia is unfounded.

Coping with paranoia has never been removing it. Instead, it's about recognizing the root of it (mental health related origin) and guiding my behaviors and reactions to it.  It's rough at times.  If every fiber of your being is telling you that a secret organization is on their way to abduct you and force you into service for them, it's hard to drive to work and be able to think clearly enough to do your job.

Even if I can rationalise around it enough to function, any acknowledgement of it, like trying to explain it as it's happening or even letting someone know I'm having an episode, it becomes nearly impossible to put aside and not act on the paranoia.  It's like acknowledging to others that it exists brings it to the surface.